Exercises

Exercise 9.26

455

then, by continuity, any local maximum of L(q, θ) will also be a local maximum of
ln p(X|θ).
Consider the case of N independent data points x1 , . . . , xN with corresponding
latent variables z1 , . . . , zN . The joint distribution p(X, Z|θ) factorizes over the data
points, and this structure can be exploited in an incremental form of EM in which
at each EM cycle only one data point is processed at a time. In the E step, instead
of recomputing the responsibilities for all of the data points, we just re-evaluate the
responsibilities for one data point. It might appear that the subsequent M step would
require computation involving the responsibilities for all of the data points. However, if the mixture components are members of the exponential family, then the
responsibilities enter only through simple sufﬁcient statistics, and these can be updated efﬁciently. Consider, for instance, the case of a Gaussian mixture, and suppose
we perform an update for data point m in which the corresponding old and new
values of the responsibilities are denoted γ old (zmk ) and γ new (zmk ). In the M step,
the required sufﬁcient statistics can be updated incrementally. For instance, for the
means the sufﬁcient statistics are deﬁned by (9.17) and (9.18) from which we obtain
 new

γ (zmk ) − γ old (zmk )
new
old
xm − µold
(9.78)
µ k = µk +
k
Nknew
together with

Nknew = Nkold + γ new (zmk ) − γ old (zmk ).

(9.79)

The corresponding results for the covariances and the mixing coefﬁcients are analogous.
Thus both the E step and the M step take ﬁxed time that is independent of the
total number of data points. Because the parameters are revised after each data point,
rather than waiting until after the whole data set is processed, this incremental version can converge faster than the batch version. Each E or M step in this incremental
algorithm is increasing the value of L(q, θ) and, as we have shown above, if the
algorithm converges to a local (or global) maximum of L(q, θ), this will correspond
to a local (or global) maximum of the log likelihood function ln p(X|θ).

Exercises

9.1 ( ) www Consider the K-means algorithm discussed in Section 9.1. Show that as
a consequence of there being a ﬁnite number of possible assignments for the set of
discrete indicator variables rnk , and that for each such assignment there is a unique
optimum for the {µk }, the K-means algorithm must converge after a ﬁnite number
of iterations.
9.2 ( ) Apply the Robbins-Monro sequential estimation procedure described in Section 2.3.5 to the problem of ﬁnding the roots of the regression function given by
the derivatives of J in (9.1) with respect to µk . Show that this leads to a stochastic
K-means algorithm in which, for each data point xn , the nearest prototype µk is
updated using (9.5).

456

9. MIXTURE MODELS AND EM
9.3 ( ) www Consider a Gaussian mixture model in which the marginal distribution
p(z) for the latent variable is given by (9.10), and the conditional distribution p(x|z)
for the observed variable is given by (9.11). Show that the marginal distribution
p(x), obtained by summing p(z)p(x|z) over all possible values of z, is a Gaussian
mixture of the form (9.7).
9.4 ( ) Suppose we wish to use the EM algorithm to maximize the posterior distribution over parameters p(θ|X) for a model containing latent variables, where X is
the observed data set. Show that the E step remains the same as in the maximum
likelihood case, whereas in the M step the quantity to be maximized is given by
Q(θ, θ old ) + ln p(θ) where Q(θ, θ old ) is deﬁned by (9.30).
9.5 ( ) Consider the directed graph for a Gaussian mixture model shown in Figure 9.6.
By making use of the d-separation criterion discussed in Section 8.2, show that the
posterior distribution of the latent variables factorizes with respect to the different
data points so that
p(Z|X, µ, Σ, π) =

N


p(zn |xn , µ, Σ, π).

(9.80)

n=1

9.6 ( ) Consider a special case of a Gaussian mixture model in which the covariance matrices Σk of the components are all constrained to have a common value
Σ. Derive the EM equations for maximizing the likelihood function under such a
model.
9.7 ( ) www Verify that maximization of the complete-data log likelihood (9.36) for
a Gaussian mixture model leads to the result that the means and covariances of each
component are ﬁtted independently to the corresponding group of data points, and
the mixing coefﬁcients are given by the fractions of points in each group.
9.8 ( ) www Show that if we maximize (9.40) with respect to µk while keeping the
responsibilities γ(znk ) ﬁxed, we obtain the closed form solution given by (9.17).
9.9 ( ) Show that if we maximize (9.40) with respect to Σk and πk while keeping the
responsibilities γ(znk ) ﬁxed, we obtain the closed form solutions given by (9.19)
and (9.22).
9.10 (

) Consider a density model given by a mixture distribution
p(x) =

K


πk p(x|k)

(9.81)

k=1

and suppose that we partition the vector x into two parts so that x = (xa , xb ).
Show that the conditional density p(xb |xa ) is itself a mixture distribution and ﬁnd
expressions for the mixing coefﬁcients and for the component densities.

Exercises

457

9.11 ( ) In Section 9.3.2, we obtained a relationship between K means and EM for
Gaussian mixtures by considering a mixture model in which all components have
covariance I. Show that in the limit  → 0, maximizing the expected completedata log likelihood for this model, given by (9.40), is equivalent to minimizing the
distortion measure J for the K-means algorithm given by (9.1).
9.12 ( ) www

Consider a mixture distribution of the form
p(x) =

K


πk p(x|k)

(9.82)

k=1

where the elements of x could be discrete or continuous or a combination of these.
Denote the mean and covariance of p(x|k) by µk and Σk , respectively. Show that
the mean and covariance of the mixture distribution are given by (9.49) and (9.50).
9.13 ( ) Using the re-estimation equations for the EM algorithm, show that a mixture of Bernoulli distributions, with its parameters set to values corresponding to a
maximum of the likelihood function, has the property that
1 
xn ≡ x.
N
N

E[x] =

(9.83)

n=1

Hence show that if the parameters of this model are initialized such that all components have the same mean µk = µ
 for k = 1, . . . , K, then the EM algorithm will
converge after one iteration, for any choice of the initial mixing coefﬁcients, and that
this solution has the property µk = x. Note that this represents a degenerate case of
the mixture model in which all of the components are identical, and in practice we
try to avoid such solutions by using an appropriate initialization.
9.14 ( ) Consider the joint distribution of latent and observed variables for the Bernoulli
distribution obtained by forming the product of p(x|z, µ) given by (9.52) and p(z|π)
given by (9.53). Show that if we marginalize this joint distribution with respect to z,
then we obtain (9.47).
9.15 ( ) www Show that if we maximize the expected complete-data log likelihood
function (9.55) for a mixture of Bernoulli distributions with respect to µk , we obtain
the M step equation (9.59).
9.16 ( ) Show that if we maximize the expected complete-data log likelihood function
(9.55) for a mixture of Bernoulli distributions with respect to the mixing coefﬁcients
πk , using a Lagrange multiplier to enforce the summation constraint, we obtain the
M step equation (9.60).
9.17 ( ) www Show that as a consequence of the constraint 0 ⩽ p(xn |µk ) ⩽ 1 for
the discrete variable xn , the incomplete-data log likelihood function for a mixture
of Bernoulli distributions is bounded above, and hence that there are no singularities
for which the likelihood goes to inﬁnity.

458

9. MIXTURE MODELS AND EM
9.18 ( ) Consider a Bernoulli mixture model as discussed in Section 9.3.3, together
with a prior distribution p(µk |ak , bk ) over each of the parameter vectors µk given
by the beta distribution (2.13), and a Dirichlet prior p(π|α) given by (2.38). Derive
the EM algorithm for maximizing the posterior probability p(µ, π|X).
9.19 ( ) Consider a D-dimensional variable x each of whose components i is itself a
multinomial variable of degree M so that x is a binary vector with components
xij

where i = 1, . . . , D and j = 1, . . . , M , subject to the constraint that j xij = 1 for
all i. Suppose that the distribution of these variables is described by a mixture of the
discrete multinomial distributions considered in Section 2.2 so that
p(x) =

K


πk p(x|µk )

(9.84)

k=1

where
p(x|µk ) =

D 
M


x

ij
µkij
.

(9.85)

i=1 j =1

The parameters µkij represent the probabilities
 p(xij = 1|µk ) and must satisfy
0 ⩽ µkij ⩽ 1 together with the constraint j µkij = 1 for all values of k and i.
Given an observed data set {xn }, where n = 1, . . . , N , derive the E and M step
equations of the EM algorithm for optimizing the mixing coefﬁcients πk and the
component parameters µkij of this distribution by maximum likelihood.
9.20 ( ) www Show that maximization of the expected complete-data log likelihood
function (9.62) for the Bayesian linear regression model leads to the M step reestimation result (9.63) for α.
9.21 ( ) Using the evidence framework of Section 3.5, derive the M-step re-estimation
equations for the parameter β in the Bayesian linear regression model, analogous to
the result (9.63) for α.
9.22 ( ) By maximization of the expected complete-data log likelihood deﬁned by
(9.66), derive the M step equations (9.67) and (9.68) for re-estimating the hyperparameters of the relevance vector machine for regression.
9.23 ( ) www In Section 7.2.1 we used direct maximization of the marginal likelihood to derive the re-estimation equations (7.87) and (7.88) for ﬁnding values of
the hyperparameters α and β for the regression RVM. Similarly, in Section 9.3.4
we used the EM algorithm to maximize the same marginal likelihood, giving the
re-estimation equations (9.67) and (9.68). Show that these two sets of re-estimation
equations are formally equivalent.
9.24 ( ) Verify the relation (9.70) in which L(q, θ) and KL(qp) are deﬁned by (9.71)
and (9.72), respectively.

Exercises

459

Show that the lower bound L(q, θ) given by (9.71), with q(Z) =
9.25 ( ) www
p(Z|X, θ (old) ), has the same gradient with respect to θ as the log likelihood function
ln p(X|θ) at the point θ = θ (old) .
9.26 ( ) www Consider the incremental form of the EM algorithm for a mixture of
Gaussians, in which the responsibilities are recomputed only for a speciﬁc data point
xm . Starting from the M-step formulae (9.17) and (9.18), derive the results (9.78)
and (9.79) for updating the component means.
9.27 ( ) Derive M-step formulae for updating the covariance matrices and mixing
coefﬁcients in a Gaussian mixture model when the responsibilities are updated incrementally, analogous to the result (9.78) for updating the means.

10
Approximate
Inference

A central task in the application of probabilistic models is the evaluation of the posterior distribution p(Z|X) of the latent variables Z given the observed (visible) data
variables X, and the evaluation of expectations computed with respect to this distribution. The model might also contain some deterministic parameters, which we
will leave implicit for the moment, or it may be a fully Bayesian model in which any
unknown parameters are given prior distributions and are absorbed into the set of
latent variables denoted by the vector Z. For instance, in the EM algorithm we need
to evaluate the expectation of the complete-data log likelihood with respect to the
posterior distribution of the latent variables. For many models of practical interest, it
will be infeasible to evaluate the posterior distribution or indeed to compute expectations with respect to this distribution. This could be because the dimensionality of
the latent space is too high to work with directly or because the posterior distribution
has a highly complex form for which expectations are not analytically tractable. In
the case of continuous variables, the required integrations may not have closed-form

461

462

10. APPROXIMATE INFERENCE
analytical solutions, while the dimensionality of the space and the complexity of the
integrand may prohibit numerical integration. For discrete variables, the marginalizations involve summing over all possible conﬁgurations of the hidden variables,
and though this is always possible in principle, we often ﬁnd in practice that there
may be exponentially many hidden states so that exact calculation is prohibitively
expensive.
In such situations, we need to resort to approximation schemes, and these fall
broadly into two classes, according to whether they rely on stochastic or deterministic approximations. Stochastic techniques such as Markov chain Monte Carlo, described in Chapter 11, have enabled the widespread use of Bayesian methods across
many domains. They generally have the property that given inﬁnite computational
resource, they can generate exact results, and the approximation arises from the use
of a ﬁnite amount of processor time. In practice, sampling methods can be computationally demanding, often limiting their use to small-scale problems. Also, it can
be difﬁcult to know whether a sampling scheme is generating independent samples
from the required distribution.
In this chapter, we introduce a range of deterministic approximation schemes,
some of which scale well to large applications. These are based on analytical approximations to the posterior distribution, for example by assuming that it factorizes
in a particular way or that it has a speciﬁc parametric form such as a Gaussian. As
such, they can never generate exact results, and so their strengths and weaknesses
are complementary to those of sampling methods.
In Section 4.4, we discussed the Laplace approximation, which is based on a
local Gaussian approximation to a mode (i.e., a maximum) of the distribution. Here
we turn to a family of approximation techniques called variational inference or variational Bayes, which use more global criteria and which have been widely applied.
We conclude with a brief introduction to an alternative variational framework known
as expectation propagation.

10.1. Variational Inference
Variational methods have their origins in the 18th century with the work of Euler,
Lagrange, and others on the calculus of variations. Standard calculus is concerned
with ﬁnding derivatives of functions. We can think of a function as a mapping that
takes the value of a variable as the input and returns the value of the function as the
output. The derivative of the function then describes how the output value varies
as we make inﬁnitesimal changes to the input value. Similarly, we can deﬁne a
functional as a mapping that takes a function as the input and that returns the value
of the functional as the output. An example would be the entropy H[p], which takes
a probability distribution p(x) as the input and returns the quantity

H[p] = p(x) ln p(x) dx
(10.1)

10.1. Variational Inference

463

as the output. We can the introduce the concept of a functional derivative, which expresses how the value of the functional changes in response to inﬁnitesimal changes
to the input function (Feynman et al., 1964). The rules for the calculus of variations
mirror those of standard calculus and are discussed in Appendix D. Many problems
can be expressed in terms of an optimization problem in which the quantity being
optimized is a functional. The solution is obtained by exploring all possible input
functions to ﬁnd the one that maximizes, or minimizes, the functional. Variational
methods have broad applicability and include such areas as ﬁnite element methods
(Kapur, 1989) and maximum entropy (Schwarz, 1988).
Although there is nothing intrinsically approximate about variational methods,
they do naturally lend themselves to ﬁnding approximate solutions. This is done
by restricting the range of functions over which the optimization is performed, for
instance by considering only quadratic functions or by considering functions composed of a linear combination of ﬁxed basis functions in which only the coefﬁcients
of the linear combination can vary. In the case of applications to probabilistic inference, the restriction may for example take the form of factorization assumptions
(Jordan et al., 1999; Jaakkola, 2001).
Now let us consider in more detail how the concept of variational optimization
can be applied to the inference problem. Suppose we have a fully Bayesian model in
which all parameters are given prior distributions. The model may also have latent
variables as well as parameters, and we shall denote the set of all latent variables
and parameters by Z. Similarly, we denote the set of all observed variables by X.
For example, we might have a set of N independent, identically distributed data,
for which X = {x1 , . . . , xN } and Z = {z1 , . . . , zN }. Our probabilistic model
speciﬁes the joint distribution p(X, Z), and our goal is to ﬁnd an approximation for
the posterior distribution p(Z|X) as well as for the model evidence p(X). As in our
discussion of EM, we can decompose the log marginal probability using
ln p(X) = L(q) + KL(qp)
where we have deﬁned

(10.2)



p(X, Z)
q(Z) ln
dZ
q(Z)

p(Z|X)
dZ.
KL(qp) = − q(Z) ln
q(Z)
L(q) =

(10.3)
(10.4)

This differs from our discussion of EM only in that the parameter vector θ no longer
appears, because the parameters are now stochastic variables and are absorbed into
Z. Since in this chapter we will mainly be interested in continuous variables we have
used integrations rather than summations in formulating this decomposition. However, the analysis goes through unchanged if some or all of the variables are discrete
simply by replacing the integrations with summations as required. As before, we
can maximize the lower bound L(q) by optimization with respect to the distribution
q(Z), which is equivalent to minimizing the KL divergence. If we allow any possible
choice for q(Z), then the maximum of the lower bound occurs when the KL divergence vanishes, which occurs when q(Z) equals the posterior distribution p(Z|X).

464

10. APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

1

40

0.8

30

0.6
20
0.4
10

0.2
0
−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

0
−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

Figure 10.1 Illustration of the variational approximation for the example considered earlier in Figure 4.14. The
left-hand plot shows the original distribution (yellow) along with the Laplace (red) and variational (green) approximations, and the right-hand plot shows the negative logarithms of the corresponding curves.

However, we shall suppose the model is such that working with the true posterior
distribution is intractable.
We therefore consider instead a restricted family of distributions q(Z) and then
seek the member of this family for which the KL divergence is minimized. Our goal
is to restrict the family sufﬁciently that they comprise only tractable distributions,
while at the same time allowing the family to be sufﬁciently rich and ﬂexible that it
can provide a good approximation to the true posterior distribution. It is important to
emphasize that the restriction is imposed purely to achieve tractability, and that subject to this requirement we should use as rich a family of approximating distributions
as possible. In particular, there is no ‘over-ﬁtting’ associated with highly ﬂexible distributions. Using more ﬂexible approximations simply allows us to approach the true
posterior distribution more closely.
One way to restrict the family of approximating distributions is to use a parametric distribution q(Z|ω) governed by a set of parameters ω. The lower bound L(q)
then becomes a function of ω, and we can exploit standard nonlinear optimization
techniques to determine the optimal values for the parameters. An example of this
approach, in which the variational distribution is a Gaussian and we have optimized
with respect to its mean and variance, is shown in Figure 10.1.

10.1.1 Factorized distributions
Here we consider an alternative way in which to restrict the family of distributions q(Z). Suppose we partition the elements of Z into disjoint groups that we
denote by Zi where i = 1, . . . , M . We then assume that the q distribution factorizes
with respect to these groups, so that
q(Z) =

M

i=1

qi (Zi ).

(10.5)

10.1. Variational Inference

465

It should be emphasized that we are making no further assumptions about the distribution. In particular, we place no restriction on the functional forms of the individual
factors qi (Zi ). This factorized form of variational inference corresponds to an approximation framework developed in physics called mean ﬁeld theory (Parisi, 1988).
Amongst all distributions q(Z) having the form (10.5), we now seek that distribution for which the lower bound L(q) is largest. We therefore wish to make a free
form (variational) optimization of L(q) with respect to all of the distributions qi (Zi ),
which we do by optimizing with respect to each of the factors in turn. To achieve
this, we ﬁrst substitute (10.5) into (10.3) and then dissect out the dependence on one
of the factors qj (Zj ). Denoting qj (Zj ) by simply qj to keep the notation uncluttered,
we then obtain

  

L(q) =
qi ln p(X, Z) −
ln qi dZ



i

qj

=

i


ln p(X, Z)

i= j


=



qj ln 
p(X, Zj ) dZj −



qi dZi


dZj −

qj ln qj dZj + const


qj ln qj dZj + const

(10.6)

where we have deﬁned a new distribution 
p(X, Zj ) by the relation
ln 
p(X, Zj ) = Ei=j [ln p(X, Z)] + const.

(10.7)

Here the notation Ei=j [· · · ] denotes an expectation with respect to the q distributions
over all variables zi for i = j, so that


Ei=j [ln p(X, Z)] = ln p(X, Z)
qi dZi .
(10.8)
i= j

Now suppose we keep the {qi=j } ﬁxed and maximize L(q) in (10.6) with respect to all possible forms for the distribution qj (Zj ). This is easily done by recognizing that (10.6) is a negative Kullback-Leibler divergence between qj (Zj ) and

p(X, Zj ). Thus maximizing (10.6) is equivalent to minimizing the Kullback-Leibler

Leonhard Euler
1707–1783
Euler was a Swiss mathematician
and physicist who worked in St.
Petersburg and Berlin and who is
widely considered to be one of the
greatest mathematicians of all time.
He is certainly the most proliﬁc, and
his collected works ﬁll 75 volumes. Amongst his many

contributions, he formulated the modern theory of the
function, he developed (together with Lagrange) the
calculus of variations, and he discovered the formula
eiπ = −1, which relates four of the most important
numbers in mathematics. During the last 17 years of
his life, he was almost totally blind, and yet he produced nearly half of his results during this period.

